# ME/CFS-Differential-Gene-Expression-Analysis

This repository hosts the differential gene expression analysis of a cohort of 23 patients diagnosed with ME/CFS.

## Background

Myalgic Encephalomyelitis/Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) is a chronic and debilitating illness affecting millions
of individuals worldwide. It is characterized by severe fatigue, pain, flu-like symptoms, and cognitive issues. The
cause of ME/CFS is not well understood, but evidence suggests a genetic predisposition and dysregulation of the immune
system leading to an overactive immune response.

## Installation

### Requirements

- R (version 4.4.0)
- RStudio
- Git v2.0+

### Setup

Installation starts with fetching the Git repo and cloning it:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/uab-cgds-worthey/mecfs-dge-analysis.git
cd mecfs-dge-analysis/
```

### Restoring the Environment

Open this project in RStudio. Upon opening, `renv` should automatically install.

If `renv` does not install automatically, run the following command in your R console:

```r
install.packages('renv')
```

Then proceed with the instructions below:

```r
# Restore the R environment
renv::restore()
```

## Analysis

This project has been created using the `workflowr` template. The analysis and associated code are an extension and
modification of [Dr. Gurpreet Kaur's](https://github.com/gurpreet-bioinfo) previous work and guidance.
The Rmarkdown files for the analysis are located in the `analysis` folder.

### Input data

Our data input is generated by the [nf-core/rnaseq pipeline](https://github.com/nf-core/rnaseq) using Salmon, which
estimates gene-level counts corrected for transcript length bias.

Input file: [salmon.merged.gene_counts_length_scaled](data/star-salmon/salmon.merged.gene_counts_length_scaled.tsv)

### Rerunning the workflow

To rerun the entire workflow, open the project in RStudio and run the following commands in your R console:

```r
# Load the workflowr library
library(workflowr)

# Rebuild the workflow R site to view all figures in the browser
wflow_build("analysis/*.Rmd")
wflow_view()
```

## Results

Results (including figures generated for the publication) can be found in the `docs` folder or viewable at [this website](https://uab-cgds-worthey.github.io/mecfs-dge-analysis/).

## Author

Shaurita D. Hutchins [:email:](mailto:sdhutchins@uab.edu) | Graduate Research Assistant